8- Ansible Vault
Be the first to add a reaction

Owned by noel.tatah (Unlicensed)
Last updated: Sep 10, 2024 by Estephe Kana
3 min read

This tutorial will help you to understand everything about Ansible Vault.

At the end of this document, you will be able to understand,

    What is Ansible Vault?

    How to Encrypt the Ansible Playbooks?

    How to decrypt it?

    How to view and edit if required?

    How to reset a new Ansible vault password?

Prerequisite:

    Ansible Terraform lab is up and running

How to use Ansible Vault to Protect Ansible Playbooks
What is Ansible Vault?

Ansible Vault is a feature of Ansible which allows us to protect sensitive data with encryption in a playbook such as data files, usernames, passwords, and configurations.

If any Ansible playbook is encrypted, even an Ansible administrator cannot read a playbook with any editors without providing a valid vault password. It's not publicly visible.
How to encrypt an Ansible Playbook?

Here we are going to encrypt our first-playbook.yml

    Move into the Ansible dev directory

cd ansible-dev

    Use the option "encrypt" along with the Ansible-vault command. Enter the vault password twice you wish to set for the particular playbook first-playbook.yml, this password is only for this file.

ansible-vault encrypt first-playbook.yml
image-20240109-064604.png

Yes, "first-playbook.yml" is encrypted.

Now, if anyone tries to open the protected file with any normal editors, it cannot be readable by the users because it's encrypted.
image-20240109-065056.png

So Once any playbook is encrypted with the Ansible-vault command, you have to use the Ansible vault command to manage the encrypted file as below.
How to view an encrypted playbook file?

Use the "view" option along with ansible-vault command and enter the vault password.
ansible-vault view first-playbook.yml
image-20240109-065255.png

Use the "edit" option along with ansible-vault command and enter the vault password. This will use your default editor set in your user environment.
ansible-vault edit first-playbook.yml
image-20240510-100535.png
image-20240510-100443.png

Once you have done the changes, save and exit from the file.
How to run an encrypted Ansible playbook file?

If a playbook is encrypted, We cannot run it as we do normally. Otherwise, you would get an error as below.
ansible-playbook first-playbook.yml
image-20240109-065653.png

Instead, we can use the argument "--ask-vault-pass" to provide the vault password or Save your vault password in a file and call it using the argument "--vault-password-file".

Using the argument "--ask-vault-pass"
ansible-playbook first-playbook.yml --ask-vault-pass

Enter the vault password when it prompts to run the Ansible playbook.
Using the argument "--vault-password-file"

Before running, create a new file with the command:  vi vault-passwd, add your vault password in and save it.

Once it’s done, run the playbook again.
ansible-playbook first-playbook.yml --vault-password-file vault-passwd

This time, the vault password will be taken from the file you have provided, hence it won't prompt you to enter the vault password again.

If you are not allowed to store the password in a clear format, then use only "--ask-vault-pass" argument.
How to change an existing vault password?

Use the "rekey" option along with ansible-vault command. Enter the old vault password and enter the new password twice.
ansible-vault rekey first-playbook.yml
image-20240510-103221.png
How to decrypt a protected Ansible playbook file?

Use the "decrypt" option along with ansible-vault command,
ansible-vault decrypt first-playbook.yml
image-20240510-103346.png

Now the playbook is decrypted.

We just saw how to use Ansible Vault to protect and encrypt playbooks. You can go ahead and practice to understand better.

https://dataservicegroup.atlassian.net/wiki/x/UYD3iw