Data Services Group
Create an Amazon Redshift Cluster

Owned by Estephe Kana
Last updated: Aug 31, 2024
4 min read
Objective:

At the end of this tutorial, you must be able to create a redshift cluster and interact with databases and tables.
Prerequisite:

To have an AWS account created.
Create a Cluster in AWS Redshift

To create an AWS Redshift Cluster, follow the steps below:

    Login to your account from the AWS Console

    Click on the Search bar, then type redshift and click on Amazon Redshift service

    Click on Clusters in the left menu of the AWS Redshift dashboard

    Scroll down and click on Create cluster

    Set the Cluster Configuration as follows:

        Cluster identifier: myredshift-cluster

        Node type: dc2.large

        Leave the remaining config as the default

     Scroll down and set the database configurations as follows:

        Admin user name: awsuser

        Check Manually add the admin password

        Admin user password: School123

These database configurations are used to create a default database called dev.

    Scroll down to Additional Configurations and make sure that use defaults button is active. This default config means the cluster will use the default VPC and default security group.

    Click on Create Cluster

The cluster’s creation process will take some time, so you have to wait until the process is finished.

When the cluster has been successfully created, you will get the below information in Clusters
Connect to the database and make some queries

Before making some queries with our Redshift cluster, we have to connect to the dev database. 

    To connect to the database, click on Query editor in the left panel, then click on Connect to database

    In the window that appears, fill in the information as follows:

         Database name: dev

        Database user: awsuser

    Then click on Connect

    Once done, you will see in the Editor our dev database and the public schema.

Let’s run some queries to interact with our database.

Query 1: create a table that will store personal information about the DevOps team in your company.

    Use devops_team as the table name, copy the following code and paste it into the query block shown in the previous image. 

create table devops_team(
  firstname varchar(30),
  lastname varchar(30)
);

    To execute the query, let’s click on the Run button down the script. Your query has been completed.

Query 2: Insert data of 3 members of the DevOps team.

    To create a new query click on +, then copy and paste the below code.

 
insert into devops_team values
('Estephe','Kana'),
('John','Obi'),
('Mike','Jordan');

    After pasting the code, run it and the result will show: completed.

Query 3: Get the list of all the members of the DevOps team

    To get the list of DevOps engineers, create a new query, then copy and paste the following code in there.

select * from devops_team;

Run this query, then you will get the output below:

To better understand the query commands, do some research on Google about SQL commands. 
Delete the resource

To delete the AWS Redshift cluster we created, follow the instructions below:

    Go to the AWS Redshift dashboard, in the left panel click on Clusters, then choose myredshift-cluster

    Click on Actions, then choose Delete

    In the window that appears, type delete and check the button if you want to Create a final snapshot. Type in delete and click on Delete cluster.

    The process will take some time to delete the cluster completely.





https://dataservicegroup.atlassian.net/wiki/x/uwB9gg  # OFFICIAL LINK